Coetzee’s style, here as elsewhere in his books, is intimate, with the focus on the “small-scale” events of human experience. The book evokes the minutiae of home, school, family and personal relationships. Indeed, the main achievement of the book is that takes us so convincingly into the personal space of a young protagonist as he painfully grows away from family dependencies and into adolescent independence and early adulthood. 
The use of a third person address appears, on the surface, to reflect the adoption of a conventional memoir mode. A memoir is traditionally a collection of the memories of a public figure in which the author refers to himself or herself in the third person. The self being described in “Boyhood” is not an “I”, a subject, but a “he”, a protagonist, the younger Coetzee. At the same time, there is another, anonymous, “I”, which is the speaking voice, the omniscient narrator, of the book. This older, adult “I” stands behind, above, alongside the younger self, the “he” that is the ostensible subject of the book “Boyhood”.
 Thus, the book is both a memoir and a parody of a memoir, because the “I”, the self, at the centre of the account who experiences life is continually in a complicated ironic tension with the “I”, the self, of the narrator who selects details and leaves others out, who knows and judges after the event. This other self, the narrator, should be detached and dispassionate, a critical perspective, but in this case, the supposedly authoritative self is the “same” as the self it claims to have authority over. The narrator may be a fraud, too. Coetzee’s use of a free indirect discourse method of narrative enables the reader to slip in and out of the protagonist’s consciousness, giving the reader the illusion of seeing how he sees, feeling how he feels, while at the same time the presence of the convention of the third person narrator, the omniscient I, is there to remind the reader of the fictive and constructed nature of the self that it presents.    
Thus, Coetzee presents the notion of the self in a rich and layered, self-reflexive fashion. The self is a multiple and fluid, rather than a stable and unitary, concept in “Boyhood”. There are stories we agree to tell about the self, the book argues, but these are not to be confused with the way the self really experiences the world (which in Coetzee’s view is just too bleak to be told). 
Towards the end of the book, the following passage occurs which illustrates the above, this sense of the discrepancy between the blinding clarity of a “real” subjective experience and the self that one comfortingly fits into the obfuscating structures of a story:
“Sometimes the gloom lifts. The sky, that usually sits tight and closed over his head, not so near that it can be touched but not much further either, opens as a slit, and for an interval he can see the world as it really is. He sees himself in his white shirt with rolled-up sleeves and the grey short trousers that he is on the point of outgrowing: not a child, not what a passer-by would call a child, too big for that now, too big to use that excuse, yet still as stupid and self-enclosed as a child: childish; dumb; ignorant; retarded. In a moment like this he can see his father and his mother too, from above, without anger: not as two grey and formless weights seating themselves on his shoulders, plotting his misery day and night, but as a man and woman living dull and trouble-filled lives of their own. The sky opens, he sees the world as it is, then the sky closes and he is himself again, living the only story he will admit, the story of himself. (160-1)
The politics of style     
Critics of Coetzee’s work generally have argued that the minimalist focus on personal experience means that they don’t throw a light on the larger political issues of his time (i.e. apartheid). As David Attwell says: “it was held that Coetzee was a philosophical idealist whose fiction […] offered […] neither an analysis of the play of historical forces nor a moral anchor in the search for a humane response to colonialism and apartheid” (Attwell, 1993).  
Other critics have questioned this view of Coetzee as an apolitical aesthete by suggesting that his works consistently explore the interfaces between history and discourse, politics and text, and therefore do contribute indirectly to a critical understanding of South African society and politics. 
“Coetzee’s response to this situation [of being a white South African] is to interrogate the specific form of marginality he represents. Although it is true that his novels are nourished by their relationship with […] Western literature, it is equally true that through this complicated postcoloniality he brings that situation to light and finds fictional forms wherein it can be objectified, named and questioned” (Attwell, 1993). 
Coetzee is often compared with another South African writer, Nadine Gordimer. Gordimer saw herself as a critical witness to apartheid. She dedicated herself to exposing the moral abuse of power that she felt was happening in South Africa during much of her life time. Consequently, her work was sometimes banned or censored by South African authorities.  
Coetzee, on the other hand, questions whether literature can play any positive role in any mission to right public wrongs or transform social and political values. For him, the writer must distance himself from questions of society and politics in the first place in order to focus instead on depicting the subtleties and complexities of subjective experience, since this is what language and literature have always tended to represent. 
What can also be said, in addition, is that Coetzee’s worldview is essentially a tragic or pessimistic one. His novels tend to depict the progressive breakdown of personalities, their disengagement from the worlds they are forced to inhabit. His protagonists also tend to be rather marginal and unhappy figures to begin with. He seems to feel as a writer (and as a human being) that life is inherently and insuperably difficult, a constant trial that will likely end in defeat. In this sense he seems to have seen himself as a lonely recorder of small-scale human loss, rather than a witness to a systemic political and institutional outrage (a la Gordimer). As the protagonist reflects, at the end of Boyhood: 
“He alone is left to do the thinking. How will he keep them all in his head, all the books, all the people, all the stories? And if he does not remember them, who will?” (166)   
This guilty reflection parallel echoes a previous anecdote, a recollection of an early memory of dropping a sweet wrapper on a bus winding its way up a desolate mountain pass in South Africa:
“He thinks all the time of the scrap of paper, alone in all that vastness, that he abandoned when he should not have abandoned it. One day he must go back to the Swartburg Pass and find it and rescue it. This is his duty: he may not die until he has done it” (31). 
